---
title: Track Metadata Models
ingress: Metadata models across data portals and interoperability

figures:
  - path:
      - images
      - fair
      - metadata-models.png
    caption:
      ISA generic model for scientific data. Metadata is hierachically nested in comprising the
      "Investigation", "Study", and "Assay" structures.
    zoomable: true
  - path:
      - images
      - fair
      - fairtracks-model.png
    caption:
      Overview of the key objects in the proposed data model, and the relationships between them.
      Originally from the [FAIRtracks paper](https://f1000research.com/articles/10-268)
    zoomable: true

tables:
  - csvBaseFileName: track-models
    caption: Description of main Tracks models used in biology and scientifics studies.
    itemsPerPage: 6
    maxWidth: 1200px
---

Many of the metadata models for annotation of genomic datasets available today evolved from
[INSDSeq](https://www.insdc.org/documents/xml-status), the official supported XML format of the
International Nucleotide Sequence Database Collaboration (INSDC), a long-standing foundational
initiative that operates between NCBI, EMBL-EBI and DDBJ to facilitate genomic data exchange. The
INSDSeq standard proposes the assignment of a number of interlinked metadata object to each data
file, the most relevant among these being “Experiment”, “Study”, and “Sample”. Modern
implementations of this model are the
[ENA metadata model](https://ena-docs.readthedocs.io/en/latest/submit/general-guide/metadata.html)
and the
[Sequence Read Archive (SRA) schemas](https://trace.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/Traces/sra/sra.cgi?view=xml_schemas).

The [Investigation Study Assay (ISA)](https://isa-specs.readthedocs.io/en/latest/isamodel.html#)
metadata framework provides a flexible solution for rich description and annotation of experimental
outputs for the most common scientific domains. The ISA abstract model exhibits a hierarchical
nested structure comprising the "Investigation", "Study", and "Assay" metadata categories. The ISA
model is implemented in tabular, JSON and Resource Description Framework (RDF) formats and it is
supported by dedicated software, [ISA tools](https://isa-tools.org/), handling creation, validation,
and conversion of ISA objects. The conversion tools, in particular, are used to faciliate data
submission on ENA and ArrayExpress using SRA-xml and MAGE-Tab respectively. For all these reasons,
the ISA framework is recognized by ELIXIR Europe as a
[Recommended Interoperability Resources](https://elixir-europe.org/platforms/interoperability/rir-selection#:~:text=An%20ELIXIR%20Recommended%20Interoperability%20Resource,thus%20supporting%20the%20FAIR%20Principles).

Building upon existing best practices in the domain of genomics (see the section below for more
details), the FAIRtracks model is based on four key elements: "studies", "samples", "experiments",
and "tracks". A "track" is am atomic element representing a genomic data file. Each "track" is
generated by an "experiment", physical or in silico. Physical "experiments" link out to "samples".
Set of "experiments" are contained within a "study" object, which is akin to the EGA Study objects.
Finally, tracks are grouped into a Track Collection, which is the model container and directly
matches the existing track hub object. A Track Collection can also refer to an _ad hoc_ collection
of tracks, e.g., documenting the input data of published analyses. The additional attributes for
each object type are defined by striking a compromise between the work imposed on the producer and
the consumer of the metadata. As a result, the mandatory attributes are only the ones that appeared
necessary for generic re-analysis of the data. Notably, these fields include resolvable references
to relevant existing metadata records in external resources, in compliance with the FAIR data
principles.
